Production deployment based on docker compose (#884)
owncloud/docs-ocis: modules/ROOT/pages/depl-examples/ubuntu-compose/ubuntu-compose-prod.adoc

[.blue]##`ocis <\noreply@yourdomain.com>`##.
* `SMTP_USERNAME` +
Username for the SMTP host to connect to.
* `SMTP_PASSWORD` +
Password for the SMTP host to connect to.
* `SMTP_AUTHENTICATION` +
Authentication method for the SMTP communication.
* `SMTP_SECURITY` +
Define using secure or insecure connections to the SMTP server.
--

==== Domain Names

This environment requires that multiple subdomain names are available. They must be configured in the way that these URL`s point to the server you are using. This includes DNS settings, routing and NAT settings which is not covered here.

The following subdomains are required, an example is printed for each:

* `OCIS_DOMAIN` +
[.blue]##`ocis.yourdomain.com`##

* `COLLABORA_DOMAIN` +
[.blue]##`collabora.yourdomain.com`##

* `WOPISERVER_DOMAIN` +
[.blue]##`wopiserver.yourdomain.com`##

== Accessing Infinite Scale

Infinite Scale can be accessed from the internet and from your local network with the `OCIS_DOMAIN` you have defined:

image::depl-examples/ubuntu-compose/ubuntu-prod-install.drawio.svg[Network Overview, width=400]

== Limitations

Data Location::

> All data is stored in default docker volumes. You need to manually reconfigure the volumes if you want to define own paths.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All data is stored in default docker volumes. You need to manually reconfigure the volumes if you want to define your own paths.
```

[source,url,subs="attributes+"]
----
{download-gh-directory-url}?url={composer-url}v{compose_version}{composer-final-path}/{ocis_wopi}
----

The `.zip` file will be downloaded into your `Download` directory.

NOTE: With the next step, if you have already unzipped that file before or if you intend to update an existing extract with a new compose version downloaded, the `.env` file will get overwritten without notice and you need to xref:edit-the-configuration-file[reconfigure] your configuration!

In the shell, extract the zip file into a defined directory by issuing the following command:

[source,bash,subs="attributes+"]
----
unzip ~/Downloads/'owncloud ocis v{compose_version} deployments-examples_{ocis_wopi}.zip' \
  -d ~/compose/ocis/{ocis_wopi}
----

When files have been extracted, list the directory with:

[source,bash,subs="attributes+"]
----
ls -la ~/compose/ocis/{ocis_wopi}/
----

The listing should contain files and folders like the following:

[source,subs="+quotes"]
----
[.aqua]#config#
docker-compose.yml
.env
README.md
collabora.yml
companion.yml
...
----

== Edit the Configuration File

> Only a view settings need to be configured in the `.env` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Only a few settings need to be configured in the `.env` file:
```

Do you mean "Only a few"?

* `TRAEFIK_ACME_MAIL` +
Add a valid response eMail address for Letsencrypt, see the note below.

* `TRAEFIK_ACME_CASERVER` +
Set the CAServer to staging, see the note below.

* `OCIS_DOMAIN`, `COLLABORA_DOMAIN` and `WOPISERVER_DOMAIN` +
Set the domain names as defined in xref:domain-names[Domain Names].

* `SMPT_xxx` +
Define these settings according your eMail configuration. With the settings defined, Infinite Scale is able to send notifications to users. If the settings are not defined, Infinite Scale will start, but notifications can't be sent.

[NOTE]
====

> * When not defining own domain names, internal evaluation only domain names with self signed certificates are used automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* When not defining your own domain names, internal evaluation only domain names with self signed certificates are used automatically.
```

> * To trigger cerfificate issuing via LetsEncrypt, it checks in the request for creating valid certificates if the response eMail address is valid and continues if so. The eMail address used is defined via the variable `TRAEFIK_ACME_MAIL`. Expect that self signed certificates are used if the traefik log contains per URL defined the message "Contact emails @example.org are forbidden".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* To trigger cerfificate issuing via LetsEncrypt, it checks, in the request for creating valid certificates, if the response eMail address is valid and continues if so. The eMail address used is defined via the variable `TRAEFIK_ACME_MAIL`. Self-signed certificates are being used if the traefik log contains the message "Contact emails @example.org are forbidden".
```

> * We recommend *before using live certificates*, to use the https://letsencrypt.org/docs/staging-environment/[staging environment of Letsencrypt, window=_blank] which you can configure via `TRAEFIK_ACME_CASERVER`. If certificates can be created and are issued by `Fake LE intermediate X1`, you can switch back issuing valid certificates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* We recommend *before using live certificates*, to use the https://letsencrypt.org/docs/staging-environment/[staging environment of Letsencrypt, window=_blank] which you can configure via `TRAEFIK_ACME_CASERVER`. If certificates can be created and are issued by `Fake LE intermediate X1`, you can switch back to issuing valid certificates.
```

For later startups, you can add the `-d` flag which starts the container in the background and no logging is printed to the shell.

== First Time Login

Now, after preparations have finished, you can access your instance *from any client*. To do so, open your browser and enter the instance URL:

[source,URL]
----
ocis.yourdomain.com
----

Which will show the following screen:

image::depl-examples/ubuntu-compose/infinite-scale-login.png[Infinite Scale Login, width=300]

For the credentials, use:

* `admin` as user and 
* `admin` for the password, +
or the one you have defined manually during setup.

NOTE: If you forgot the manually defined password set during initial setup, you need to follow one of the procedures described in the xref:admin-password[Admin Password] section.

If you have logged in successfully, you should see the following screen:

image::depl-examples/ubuntu-compose/ocis-logged-in.png[Infinite Scale Logged In, width=300]

Congratulations, you have successfully setup Infinite Scale based on the deployment example.

> TIP: Checkout the https://doc.owncloud.com/[Desktop App] or https://doc.owncloud.com/[Mobile Apps] the for enhanced usage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TIP: Checkout the https://doc.owncloud.com/[Desktop App] or https://doc.owncloud.com/[Mobile Apps]  for enhanced usage.
```

Author: This change is double present and already updated via the batch.

> TIP: Checkout the https://doc.owncloud.com/[Desktop App] or https://doc.owncloud.com/[Mobile Apps] the for enhanced usage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TIP: Checkout the https://doc.owncloud.com/[Desktop App] or https://doc.owncloud.com/[Mobile Apps] to sync files to/from clients.
```

[NOTE]
====
The Infinite Scale deployment will reboot automatically on a server reboot if the compose environment is not shut down manually by the following command.

[source,bash]
----
sudo docker compose down
----
====

With further steps described below, some basic monitoring commands and a short description to uninstall Infinite Scale is provided.

== Monitor the Instance

=== Logs

Issue the following sequence of commands to monitor logs:

> .This command will print among other data the required Container ID 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.This command will print the required Container ID,  among other data 
```

[source,bash]
----
sudo docker ps
----

> .Replace the <container_id> according the container you want to monitor the log.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Replace the <container_id> according the container for which you want to monitor the log.
```

sudo docker ps -a --format "table {{.ID}}\t{{.Image}}\t{{.Command}}" | grep ocis
----

From the output, note the container ID in the printout that matches:

[.transparent-background,subs="quotes,attributes+"]
----
* Image 		-> *owncloud/ocis:{compose_version}* and
* Command starting with	-> */bin/sh -c 'ocis in…*.
----

Use the container ID identified in the following command to read the Infinite Scale logs to get the initial admin password created, replace <CONTAINER ID> accordingly:

[source,bash]
----
docker logs <CONTAINER ID> 2>&1 | less
----

The output prints the log from the beginning. As first entry, the initial admin password set during first startup is shown. You can scroll thru the log using the keyboard, see the https://wiki.ubuntuusers.de/less/[less description] for more deatils.

If no password can be identified, you must reset the admin password via the command line as described below.

=== Command Line Password Reset

To change the admin password from the command line, which you can do at any time, follow the guide described in xref:deployment/general/general-info.adoc#password-reset-for-the-admin-user[Password Reset for the Admin User].

== Remove the Instance

> Follow this guide if you to fully remove the instance including all data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Follow this guide if you want to fully remove the instance including all data.
```

=== Software Stack

For the OS, *Ubuntu LTS 24.04* has been selected, but it will also work with Ubuntu LTS 22.04. If you already have a server running Ubuntu LTS 24.04, you can use that one as long it meets the requirements listed below. 

Note that this guide expects:

* The prerequisite of a server with the installed OS is met and any required software other than Infinite Scale like docker and docker compose is installed and preconfigured and all the software is updated to the latest version.

* You have at minimum shell access and you can reach your host via ssh from another computer in your network. `sudo` permissions may be required in some steps later in the setup.

=== Other Requirements

Firewall::
Because this server is exposed to the internet, we highly recommend using a firewall for security reasons. This can be an external firewall or a firewall configured on the server. The minimum configuration for the firewall is to allow port 443. Note that this document *does not* cover configuring any kind of firewall.

Domain Name and Routing::
To access Infinite Scale from the internet, you *must*:
+
--

> * Own a domain name which will get multiple subdomains configured.

Author: ```suggestion
* Own a domain name which will get multiple subdomains configured.
** You can also use a wildcard operator for the subdomains in the DNS configuration. In case where you already use subdomains for other purposes, we recommend using a subdomain as entry point and add the wildcard operator there to allow different IP configurations.
```

* Own an IP address that points to your router and can be NATed to your server.
* Both http and https traffic for the sub-domains configured will be routed to your server.
--

eMail::
The following data needs to be available to configure the Infinite Scale eMail setup, see the xref:{s-path}/notifications.adoc[notifications service] for more details. Note that if this data is not available, Infinite Scale will start but no notifications can be sent.
+
--
* `SMTP_HOST` +
SMTP host to connect to.
* `SMTP_PORT` +
Port of the SMTP host to connect to.
* `SMTP_SENDER` +
An eMail address that is used for sending Infinite Scale notification eMails like +
[.blue]##`ocis <\noreply@yourdomain.com>`##.
* `SMTP_USERNAME` +
Username for the SMTP host to connect to.
* `SMTP_PASSWORD` +
Password for the SMTP host to connect to.
* `SMTP_AUTHENTICATION` +
Authentication method for the SMTP communication.
* `SMTP_SECURITY` +
Define using secure or insecure connections to the SMTP server.
--

==== Domain Names

> This environment requires that multiple (sub)domain names are available. You can deviate from the examples according your environment. The (sub)domain names must be configured in the way that these URL's point to the server you are using. This includes DNS settings, routing and NAT settings which is *not* covered here.

Author: ```suggestion
This environment requires that multiple (sub)domain names are available. You can deviate from the examples according your environment. The (sub)domain must be configured in the way, that these URL's point to the server you are using which includes DNS settings, routing and NAT settings and is *not* covered here. The same ist true when using a wildcard configuration. For a wildcard setup on the DNS, three (sub)domains must be provided to configure the `.env` file described in one of the next sections.
```

toc::[]

== Introduction

{description} The aim of this guide is to be up and running as fast as possible using a deployment setup that includes *Infinite Scale and web office applications for document collaboration* for home usage or small businesses. It also uses valid certificates from Letsencrypt.

NOTE: This guide references the latest production version of Infinite Scale.

== Requirements

=== Hardware

This guide describes an installation of Infinite Scale based on Ubuntu LTS and docker compose. The underlying hardware of the server can be anything as listed below as long it meets the OS requirements defined in the xref:software-stack[Software Stack]:

* Raspberry Pi (4 and higher)
* Bare Metal Server
* Virtual Machine
* ...

[NOTE]
====
* Disk space +
About 2.8GB of disk space is needed as you not only get Infinite Scale but also office packages for online collaboration and other required software to run this setup. 

* Memory +
We recommend at minimum 4-6GB of memory. 
====

=== Knowledge Stack

You, as administrator, must have the following minimum knowledge stack.

* Being capable to order and configure external accessible domains.

* Being capable to configure: +

> Router, Firewall, NAT, DHCP, networks ect.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Router, Firewall, NAT, DHCP, networks etc.
```
